---
date: ~2018.6.20
type: post
title: Tlon is Hiring! ~2018.6
author: Anthony Arroyo + Erik Newton
layout: urbit,post
navmode: navbar
navdpad: false
navselect: blog
navpath: /
navhome: /
navclass: urbit
---

Tlon, the faceless corporate entity behind Urbit, is hiring for a couple of positions:

We need to make the Urbit network strong like bull.

On the back end, we're looking for someone who has significant experience doing DevOps / automation for complex projects. Just running Puppet / Chef isn't enough. Doing automation for Urbit is going to require that you have good general system administration skills _and_ can think creatively about how to run Martian DevOps. The idea of running your own hardware has to excite you.

A beautiful UI is non-negotiable.

We're looking for someone who has a lot (5+) years of experience building stuff on the frontend. HTML, CSS, JavaScript experience is a must as well as a sense for design. Send us links to things you’ve built from scratch: your own frameworks, your own projects, your own applications.

We’re always seeking talented systems engineers.

Have you rewritten a `%vane` for fun? Are you _really_ opinionated about reactive build systems? Do want to invent a piece of the future? Drop us a line.

We're in Dogpatch, SF, near some of the world's best beignets, oddly enough. Tlon is an equal-opportunity employer and believes in work-life balance. Our office has big windows, lots of books, and an overabundance of healthy food. Send resumes to `erik at tlon.io`.
