+++
title = "~2016.10.6 Update"
date = 2016-10-06
description = "September's monthly update slipped into October!  But don't worry, it's a good one."
aliases = ["/posts/2016-10-6-update/", "/blog/2016.10-update/"]
[extra]
author = "Curtis Yarvin + Galen Wolfe-Pauly"
ship = "~sorreg-namtyv + ~ravmel-ropdyl"
+++

September's monthly update slipped into October!  But don't
worry, it's a good one.

## "Hard tech"

In [this amusing talk](http://www.themacro.com/articles/2016/09/chad-rigetti-on-building-quantum-computers/),
Chad Rigetti defines "hard tech" as "solving problems you don't
even know are solvable."  Rigetti is building a quantum
computer, which is definitely "hard tech."  More power to him!

But software can be "hard," too.  Is Urbit "hard tech"?

The correct answer at this point is: no, but it _used_ to be hard
tech.  Now it's actually real, if not exactly easy.  The Urbit
network hasn't crashed once this summer, though we did one
intentional breach (right before delivering the stars).  I'm
still kind of amazed by this.

But we still need to get to the point where (a) the whole network
can't crash ever, (b) you can put your data in an urbit and be
pretty sure it'll live forever, (c) Urbit works well as a social
network, and therefore (d) we can distribute planets to ordinary
human beings and not have them be like, "gah, what is this?"

If we had the resources of Microsoft or Google, or even of
Mozilla, we could solve these problems with a brute-force
human-wave attack.  We could just debug the system into
existence.  It must be nice.

But not.  In some ways it's essential to Urbit's mission that
there isn't a giant army behind it.  It means that the only way
Urbit can succeed, or even survive, is to be excellent.  That's
the right attitude for a stack designed for the 2020s.  Not that
we can wait until the 2020s to get (a) through (d).  Just that we
don't want our children and grandchildren to curse the day this
stack was born.  Unix, the Internet and the Web gained the world
and lost their souls -- we don't have that option.

Given this attitude, the thing that terrified me most of all
about this summer's crowdsale is that the most important parts of
Arvo -- the network and the PKI -- simply didn't exist in any
viable sense.  Yes, the present `%ames` network does net work.
There is even in theory a sort of PKI, although no one has ever
even tried to revoke a key.  It might be secure -- who knows?

More concretely, the existing `%ames` vane (kernel module) contains
both the protocol and the PKI, mixed together in a single giant
state machine of the sort I've learned never to build again.
There is no perfect code anywhere in the present production Arvo,
but the only body of _dead-end_ code -- which needs replacement,
not documentation and maintenance -- is `%ames`.

Unfortunately, networking and key management is the most
important part of Urbit.  In a sense it _is_ Urbit.  So having it
not exist, except as a design in our heads, was not a good thing.

While documenting, evangelizing and in general growing Urbit is
vastly important, what's even more important is finishing it --
without compromising its elegance.  Elegance is the only thing
Urbit has.  It's not like there aren't other operating systems.

So the first thing I did after the crowdsale was to disappear
into a hole and take care of this technical debt.  This was not
"hard tech" in the sense that I knew it was solvable.  I didn't
know it was solvable _well_, though.  And it has to be solved
_well_, because otherwise who cares.

## Check out our new, improved cc-release

I'm delighted to report that the new, rewritten `%ames` network,
and the all-new `%jael` PKI, are now at code complete.  (Code
complete means "compiling but not tested," which is actually
saying a lot in a typed functional language.)  They've been
checked in to a new `cc-release` branch on
[`github.com/urbit/arvo`](https://github.com/urbit/arvo).

I think these two vanes are definitely the best code in Urbit.
There's still a bit of fundamental work in Arvo (implementing the
boot sequence and event security mechanisms described in the
whitepaper), but this is not "hard tech" -- the designs are
clear and surprises seem unlikely.

## `%xmas`: the new network

New `%ames` (currently `arvo/xmas.hoon`, since old `%ames` is still in
the build) has had all the key management stripped out; it's just
a network vane.  It's also no longer a single giant state
machine, but a system of five simple 200-line state machines.

It was wonderful to discover that Hoon lets you write purely
functional programs with what are essentially global variables.
Specifically, nested cores generalize across global variables,
local variables, and objects, in a way I find technically quite
lovely if I do say so myself.  On the other hand, Hoon ain't
magic, and it's not like we've solved any of the
software-engineering problems inherent in a 2000-line state
machine based on global variables.  So, nice to kill that.

Don't look at new `%ames` just yet.  It was done in July and
August.  It needs a few touchups to fit the `%jael` interface.
And it needs to be brought up to `%jael`'s quality standards.

## `%jael`: reference code, PKI, and personal ledger

`%jael` (`/arvo/jael.hoon`), the PKI, is what I'm really excited
about.  It's what you should take a look at if you know any Hoon
or even if you don't.  There's several really important things
about `%jael`.

The first is that it's actually reference-quality code.  Or so I
believe.  It's literally intended to serve as a reference style
for what all production-quality Hoon should look like.  If you're
reading the code and you see anything that isn't absolutely
perfect, whether it's cosmetic or structural or anything in
between, file a PR.  `%jael` is fully commented -- if you think
it needs more comments, or fewer, file a PR...

Needless to say, a reference style will be an enormous help in
managing community contributions.  It's not that, for now at
least, we won't accept patches not written in line with the
reference `%jael` style. But we'll always accept patches to bring
'those patches' up to reference.  For the moment, the code will just
define the style by analogy, but it'll eventually spawn an actual
document.

If you're feeling ambitious and want to change the reference
style itself, your change is best submitted as a patch to `%jael`
itself.  And _really_ ambitious people can create their own
alternative Hoon styles -- hopefully defined at the same same
level of precision.

Second, `%jael` actually implements the Urbit PKI as designed,
right down to unusual but politically critical features like
escaping a bad parent.  Since the code is readable and heavily
commented, it can and will serve as the best possible reference
for the PKI's semantics.

Both `%ames` and `%jael` are designed for the new and correct
single-homed urbit model, where one pier is one ship.  In the new
world, to boot your planet, you use your ticket to generate a
symmetric key that authenticates you to your parent.  When you
share your public key with your parent, over that initial secure
channel, it notices that it hasn't signed it yet and shares its
signature back to you.

Third, `%jael` isn't just a PKI -- it's a generalized system for
formal promises.  The whole point of a PKI is that entities can
make secure statements to each other.  Of course, every `:talk`
message is a signed statement, but the really important messages
are _promises_ -- such as, for instance, "Tlon owes you 3 stars."

(Right now, the stars we sold in the crowdsale are recorded in the
state of a higher-level application (`:womb`).  (We have an
encrypted offline backup, of course.)  This is fine at a certain
level, but it's a bit rickety and not really up to Urbit's
standards of architectural elegance.  Promises and secrets are
fundamental state and need to be handled at a fundamental level.)

In a secure distributed social network, people need to be able to
make formal promises to each other.  Essentially, every ship is
an _accounting entity_.  It records its liabilities, which are
the promises it's made to others, and its assets, which are the
promises others have made to it.  When I update the promises I've
made to you, I send you an updated statement.

All kinds of promises fit this mold.  For instance, while you
don't usually think of a symmetric key as a promise from one
entity to another, it is.  It's a promise from ship A to ship B,
that B can identify itself to A by this secret.

So `%jael` will, among other glorious things, essentially allow
every galaxy to serve as an exchange for star invitations, and
any star to serve as an exchange for planet invitations.  Mere
payments are just the start of what you can do with this.  And of
course, one of our big near-term goals is to make first Urbit
invitations, then (once the crypto is truly final) actual ships,
tradeable on "regular" cryptocurrency exchanges.

One of my views about Bitcoin is that its decentralized,
trust-free ledger isn't really the most important thing about it.
Humans build trust quite easily.  For instance, Bitcoin doesn't
even enable trust-free payments -- a payment is always an
exchange for other good or service.  Do I provide the good or
service before, or after, the Bitcoin payment?  Either way,
trust is unavoidable.

The important thing about Bitcoin is just that it enables users
to manage their obligations to each other digitally, without
interacting with a 20th-century asset management system made of
paper and magnetic tape.  Giving every user their own asset
management ledger is another small revolution in that direction.
And if I'm defining and issuing my own digital assets, why do I
need to put them on a global blockchain?  You're still trusting
me to actually live up to my promises.

Last but not least, `%jael` solves one of Urbit's most important
and hardest problems: how do I back up my urbit?  I know I said
this was impossible, but I lied.

Urbit uses persistent sessions, which means a pair of ships uses
the same session sequence numbers for life.  Since every packet
is a transaction, when you send an acknowledgment, you mean it.
The upside is that we get exactly-once messaging, which if you've
ever done distributed programming is a very, very good thing.
The downside is that if you lose your state, there's no way to
recover it, since you don't know what sequence number to send
next.  (See under: [Two Generals'
Problem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Two_Generals%27_Problem)).

In the new world, the Unix layer will subscribe to a stream of
`%jael` changes which contain all certificate and rights actions.
We'll save this separately from the rest of the pier state, and
it's small and trivial to back up.

When restoring, if you have all your private keys but have lost
all other state (obviously if you don't have the latest private
key, you're hosed), you sign a new version of your will which
contains a "brain damage" bit.  When this will is propagated to
your neighbors, they learn that you're brain-damaged and reset
their sequence numbers -- and forget you know anything they told
you, treating you as a new stranger.

At the application level, all your subscriptions get closed.
Apps already have to deal with this.  Forward messages shouldn't
involve any state coupling; that's what subscriptions are for.
In case there is some coupling anyway, you'll get an event that
"ship X lost his mind, forget anything you know about him."

Essentially, we're cheating the fact that you can't have
transient sessions and [exactly-once delivery](http://bravenewgeek.com/you-cannot-have-exactly-once-delivery/)
by letting the abstraction leak in this special case, and putting
the responsibility for fixing it on the brain-damaged ship.  It
may even leak up to the user.  But dude, you're the one that let
your brain fall out of your skull.

Another thing I like about this solution (and about `%jael` in
general) is that it solves the problem of how you use someone
else's secrets, if you manage to steal them.  There's no point in
security through technical difficulty -- if you have the latest
private key for a ship, you're the captain now.  You shouldn't
have to hack something up to make this work.

## Keep in touch / office hours

`:talk` is always a great place to come and ask questions.
Someone from Tlon will be available in `:talk` from 12PM - 3PM
PDT each weekday.  And [our forum](https://fora.urbit.org) is a
great place to post questions.  We've created [this
thread](https://urbit.org/fora/posts/~2016.10.7..17.28.21..b058~/) to
discuss this post.

For anything else you can always get in touch with us via
[`urbit@urbit.org`](mailto:urbit@urbit.org).
