+++
title = "~2017.1.30 Update"
date = 2017-01-30
description = "In 2017, we're ready to start making the damn thing useful."
aliases = ["/posts/2017-1-30-update/", "/blog/2017.1-update/"]
[extra]
author = "Curtis Yarvin + Galen Wolfe-Pauly"
ship = "~sorreg-namtyv + ~ravmel-ropdyl"
+++

> TLDR: a real Urbit is an Urbit that does real work.  This means nontrivial
  progress in two areas: systems maturity and user experience.  In 2H 2016 we
  cleaned out most of the worst holes in Arvo and vere, and totally reconceived the
  user experience.  The new Urbit feels like an MVP and we can't wait to ship it.

In 2013 Urbit was intriguing.  By 2015 it had become interesting.  In 2016 it was
actually exciting (if not always in a good way!).  In 2017, we're actually
planning to make the darn thing useful.  (For certain values of the word "useful.")

Our `cc-release` stability upgrade (mainly affecting the OS layer `arvo` and the
interpreter `vere`) is roughly code-complete and being tested into existence.
Once it exists and is stable, it can actually be documented -- often, for the
first time.

And `cc-release` is our first release really designed so that neither your ship,
nor the whole network, can actually sink.  The Urbit network had zero unplanned,
and one planned, breach (network flag day) in 2H 2016.  The last planned breach,
the `cc-release` update, is planned for 1H 2017.

With the infrastructure converging, we can finally think seriously about the user
experience of Urbit.  What we're imagining is a small-scale social network and
command-line API aggregator.  It's just screenshots right now, but we're confident
that we can build it and make it work.

System software is boring (at least when done right). So let's start with the user
experience.

## Design

Galen Wolfe-Pauly is Tlon's CEO and Urbit's interaction designer.  Galen went to
architecture school.  He talks like it.  We recorded him secretly and came away
with these notes:

![](https://media.urbit.org/site/sketch-1.png)

- _UX_?  As a kid it was just _design_ or maybe _web design_.  At some point I
  remember people talking about _user interface_ or _UI_.  But I truly don't
  understand where the _X_ came from.  It's like Monster Energy got involved in
  the branding.

- An _experience_ sounds like the kind of thing that's going to be littered
  with ads, or is going to manipulate me in some way.  Something I passively
  consume.  Not something I actively control.  So I prefer _interface_ to
  _experience_, and I think you should too.

![](https://media.urbit.org/site/sketch-2.png)

- Urbit has to be just as usable as any widely used app in 2017.  For a personal
  server, the usability bar can't be Unix.  A Unix server is an industrial tool.
  An industrial tool can't be a consumer product.  You can attach a blade to the
  end of a drill and use it as a blender, but it's not a Vitamix.

- What is an app, anyway?  It's _shared computing_.  Everyone's data is one data
  structure, in one program, on one server, owned by one corporation. With _one_
  UI for everyone to do _one_ thing.

- But there isn't one big corporation that writes _all_ the code.  Everyone's
  lives are spread across a bunch of different apps.  Every app solves the
  ownership problem separately.

- So the whole user experience of using Web apps involves tracking all these
  silly little accounts, learning each and every user experience, and glaring
  helplessly at each little piece of data trapped in a different silo.

- Even your Google account doesn't feel like one thing.  Whatever your Google
  Docs are, it's not a bunch of document files on your Google Drive.  All the
  resources of Google can't make their Borg backend feel like one computer which
  belongs to you.

- The phrase 'general-purpose computing' sounds scary, but it shouldn't be.
  'Computing' doesn't mean writing code.  We're computing when we browse
  Facebook or talk to Alexa.

- Your personal server will be solving the same problems today's whole ecosystem
  of network apps solves, just all in one place that belongs to you.

- The closest thing to a general-purpose personal server today is probably the
  Chinese service WeChat.  If you don't know much about WeChat, you should
  really watch [this NYT video](https://www.nytimes.com/video/technology/100000004574648/china-internet-wechat.html).

- From a distance WeChat is great.  Everyone in China loves the one-app,
  one-identity, all-my-own-stuff user experience.  It's clearly better than
  being forced to switch apps constantly.

- But WeChat is just another giant shared-computing service.  It's made out of
  the usual 2010s server stack mess.  The visual and interaction design looks
  pretty dated.  WeChat tells us that users want one experience, but not much more than that.

![](https://media.urbit.org/site/sketch-3.png)

- To paraphrase Walter Sobchak: say what you want about the tenets of shared
  computing, but at least it's an ethos.  We know how to build very good
  special-purpose user experiences.  What's the conventional UI for a
  general-purpose personal server?  It doesn't exist.

- For most users, your urbit runs in a data center (like a web app).  You log
  into it with your browser (like a web app).  Other than that, where do you
  even start?  A `bash` prompt isn't what we're looking for.

- But wait, is the idea of a command line bad UI?  Or is the Unix command line
  just bad UI?  We know ordinary people can use command lines.  They use
  chatbots.  Long ago, they used MS-DOS.

- Today's computing user experiences, the PC and its mobile cousin, rejected the
  command line.  This made computing easy enough, at the cost of hiding much of
  its creative power.

- The power of a general-purpose server which can command not only local
  applications, but also network services, is at a whole new level.  We don't
  think any visual metaphor or 2D control panel can do it justice.

- We need to bring the full power of the machine to the user, without breaking
  their trust that the machine is on their side.  We can't let the user get lost
  or break the system.  It has to feel safe and simple to explore its furthest
  reaches.

![](https://media.urbit.org/site/sketch-4.png)

- As Neal Stephenson [tells us](http://cristal.inria.fr/~weis/info/commandline.html),
  the command line is the natural UI for any computer.  It's especially the
  natural UI for a _network_ computer, like a personal server.  A command line
  scales way better than a GUI to a large selection of actions.  And a network
  computer can do almost infinitely many things.

- When we've tried to put a simplified "for dummies" GUI on top of Urbit, it's
  just awful.  It's like a bad Linux desktop GUI.  You feel instantly that
  you've got a choice between something limited and lame, and something
  mysterious and scary.  So we threw those designs out, in search of something
  better.

- The true command line is generally thought of as something mysterious and
  scary.  Somewhere that you can do things to irreparably damage your computer.
  It's powerful, but also dangerous.

- This tradeoff — between control and safety — is false.  The unfriendly command
  line is actually just another artifact of 70s computing.  The UI of the
  command line is designed for a programmer, not an ordinary person.

- `bash` is a bad UI because there's no easy way to control its power, or learn
  all the things it can do, or separate its power to do dangerous things from
  its power to do safe ones.

- At the other end of the spectrum is the chatbot, which is a bad UI because
  it's hard to make it much more than a toy.  Like so many innovations, chatbots
  happened by accident.  It's just a way to connect an input string to network
  services.  But the natural-language metaphor of "chat" is confining.  It
  doesn't scale well to any problem that isn't trivial.

- What does a great command line look like?  It should have a strict syntax, not
  try to guess what you mean.  But it can't be a constant test of your ability
  to memorize the phonebook.

![](https://media.urbit.org/site/sketch-6.png)

- Urbit already has the beginnings of a great command line.  We parse your input
  with an actual grammar and catch errors as you type.  You can't even press
  return on an invalid command.

- What's missing is help.  A great command line needs to reach out and hug you
  in every way it can.  It needs to assume you don't know anything at all about
  the system.  It's there for you to solve your problems, but also to help you explore.

- There's actually one exotic Unix shell that does it right:
  [`fish`](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Friendly_interactive_shell).  `fish`
  jumps through some pretty amazing hoops, like parsing manpages, to give you
  context and completion.

- It's a lot easier for Urbit because we're designing the system from scratch.
  From a technical standpoint, all we have to do is add contextual help to our
  existing parser framework.  An extended rule can parse a string, or tell the
  user what it wants to parse.  In simple terms: we have to make the `:dojo`
  (our shell) much friendlier.

- The `:dojo` shell is built around the concept of a _generator_, a program that
  builds a noun.  The idea is that how you build the noun is orthogonal to what
  you do with it.  You could print it, send it as a command, etc.  There are
  several kinds of generators -- simple scripts, prompting dialogs, HTTP
  scrapers, etc.

- A generator is initialized with command-line arguments and options, in the
  classic Unix style (except typed).  In the classic Unix style, Urbit at
  present provides no help at all in constructing a command line.  You just have
  to know.

- How should it actually work?  Let's say you're trying to put Urbit in control
  of your Twitter feed.  That means you're creating a Twitter gateway on Urbit,
  which you can control with a `|twitter` command.

- Before you type a character, Urbit offers you `|` (any command with side
  effects).  (You could also add a `!` prefix, which is like `sudo` -- it lets
  you do something dangerous.)  Once you type `|`, you can page through a list
  of commands.  Once you type `|t`, that list is much shorter.  Once it can tab
  complete to `|twitter`, it prompts you with that.

- And once you get to `|twitter`, you're in a "meta-generator" that's helping
  you build the correct command line.  At least in a browser, you'll be stepping
  through a form with rich entry.  But the command line will show you the text
  of the command you're building, so next time you can just type it.

- Building a command is just a case of data entry.  In a command-line world,
  data entry is always serial.  You answer questions serially, one at a time.
  The only navigation is forward and back.

- A great Urbit console also has to be accessible both from a browser and a Unix
  terminal.  That means a prompt needs to tell the console if it could be a
  radio button, even though a terminal can't have a radio button.  We'll improve
  the interactivity of our terminal a little, but we're not rewriting Lynx.

- So, what do you do with this fancy command line?  Command everything -- from
  your urbit to the world.  Installing an app is a command.  Publishing a tweet
  is a command.  Paying someone in bitcoin is a command.

- Your urbit can show you all the things you can do, and help you do them.  If
  there's something you'd like it to do, build it!

- A great command line alone is not all that Urbit needs.  But it feels like the
  right central paradigm for interacting with your Urbit.  We'll get into the
  specifics in a future post.

![](https://media.urbit.org/site/sketch-5.png)

## Infrastructure: stability, maturity, performance, documentation:

We dragged Curtis, whose hide has turned completely white like a cave fish, from
his coding hole to stammer out this update:

We're actually doing pretty well on the infar.  Despite there being all kinds of
unacceptably broken things about Urbit 2016, the network has actually stayed up
since August, and we haven't had an unintentional continuity breach since June.

Of course, it helps that we don't ask anyone to _use_ Urbit in earnest.  And ships
still do sink.  Since an urbit is an identity, sinking your planet is a horrendous
experience.  You'll never bond with your second planet the way you did with your
first -- never mind any _data_ you may have lost.

Our upcoming `cc-release` is the last planned breaching release.  With certain
exceptions discussed below, all major parts are now (January 2017) code complete
or better.

This includes the rewritten network stack (`%ames`), code complete but untested;
the new secret vault and promise tracker (`%jael`), mostly tested; and the new
`u3_pier` event execution framework, with worker processes and real two-phase
commit, smoke-tested.  We've also completely restructured `hoon.hoon` and
`zuse.hoon`, which now are at least cosmetically acceptable.

This is not to say that the `cc-release` Urbit won't in many ways embarrass us as
engineers.  It will.  But your ships won't randomly sink, your secrets won't
randomly leak, and your datas won't randomly rot.  Or if they do, it's an
implementation bug, not a design flaw.

There are still a few cracks we need to fill in.  The main one: some top-level
adjustments to the Arvo event system.  The boot sequence now executes correctly,
but the actual boot events need to be totally refactored, as does the rather
critical Unix-Arvo interface.  The long-promised security mask and voltage flags
need to be added, and vanes adjusted to use them.  Causal tracking of execution
crashes needs to actually work.  At the user level, `:talk` needs to be split into
a user agent and a daemon, and the user-level `%kiln`, the "systemd of Urbit,"
needs a rethink to make upgrade logic state-triggered, not edge-triggered.

The console and the dojo need some work to make our user experience real.  One way
to view a high-usability command line is that a command, if you don't have the
esoteric knowledge to fill it in by just typing the syntax, is essentially a
form.  This form needs to work both in the browser and the terminal, which isn't
trivial.  Browser and terminal both need a simple multiscreen navigation model,
which we don't have yet.

There's also a bunch of Unix-level work to do, mainly in converting the old
"single-player mode" console-bound Urbit into a real system service.  Urbit works
better as a daemon which runs one or more worker processes, and talks to client
consoles over a Unix socket.  A real architecture actually makes it practical for
star owners to host the planets they issue, for example.

Finally, because we never forget the wisdom of the sages, our last act before
asking people to use Urbit will be the long awaited performance crusade.  The new
event system now at least releases outgoing events before the input queue is
clear!  You never know what optimization will achieve before you make a serious
effort, but I don't see any reason we can't carve out a new empire of speed in the
savage, uncharted east.

We haven't touched the documentation since the first half of 2016.  As always,
maturity has to come before documentation.  Premature documentation is almost as
dangerous as premature optimization.

## Notable contributions

Some notable contributions of late:

- `~ponnys-podfer` wrote a MUD
- `~palfun-foslup` created a surprisingly capable talkbot
- `~master-morzod` reworked the console in both the Hoon and C layers, adding color and cleaning up a bunch of stuff.

Anyone who contributes at this point deserves extreme praise for the ability to
work in an immature, often broken system.  We look forward to being ready for
normal programmers who aren't intrepid jungle explorers.

## Next crowdsale

We'll do another crowdsale in the spring.  We understand that the last sale left a
lot of people unable to participate — and our first priority is making sure those
who are excited about Urbit can own some real estate.  We'll announce our plans on
how this might happen soon.  If you're interested, make sure you're on our mailing
list.

## Contribution prizes

We're still thinking about the right way to award Urbit real estate to outside
contributors.  Especially after the crowdsale, it really has to feel 100% fair.
But it can't be in any way, whether legally or emotionally, a form of compensation.
We can't afford to kill the fun.

It doesn't feel right to do this at all when the documentation is completely
inadequate, because it's not fair to people who don't have the time to reverse
engineer.  But we're thinking hard about this issue.

## Future updates

We know you love these opinionated, literary state-of-the-urbit updates.  We love
writing them.  But we obsess over them too long and they take too long to write.
Urbit's ultimate success depends almost entirely on the code.

Going forward we're going to switch to commit-message style updates on a monthly
basis, with longer updates arriving sporadically.  Maker DAO does a great job of
these shorter updates
([here](https://blog.makerdao.com/2016/12/14/maker-update-925/) is an example).

If you're ever curious to check in or hear what's going on, don't hesitate to get
in touch.  You can always chat with us on
[urbit.org/stream](https://urbit.org/stream), or by booting your own Urbit.
[Twitter](https://twitter.com/urbit) or email
([urbit@urbit.org](mailto:urbit@urbit.org)) are also perfectly fine.

There's also [our forum](https://urbit.org/fora/) that anyone can post to.  We've
created [this thread](http://urbit.org/fora/posts/~2017.2.1..22.36.47..9f54~/) to
discuss this post.
