+++
title = "~2018.6.6 Update"
date = 2018-06-06
description = "A short update from the Tlon team for the week of ~2018.6.6."
[extra]
ship = "~tonlur-sarret"
author = ""
+++

Here's a short update from the team at Tlon for the week of `~2018.6.6`:

![](https://media.urbit.org/fora/updates/~2018.6.6-Update-1.jpg)

We hired somebody! We're happy to welcome to Tlon:

- *Will* `~hadrud-lodsef` -- Will studied CS at Stanford and worked for years in VC. Among other things, he likes
  ceramics and decentralized systems. He's going to work on a mix of things for us, from operations to Urbit private-key
  distribution and management.

The interface team -- *Galen* `~ravmel-ropdyl`, *Anthony* `~poldec-tonteg`, *Isaac V* `~davtyr-nimren`, *Jimmy*
`~haptyl-wanwes`, *Chris* `~sigtus-hossyn`, *Logan* `~tacryt-socryp`, and *Gavin* `~ridlur-figbud` -- is narrowing in on
an alpha version of MVE, nearing readiness to start testing internally. Anthony and Isaac have been getting our internal
testnet set up, and Logan is ready to submit our alpha iOS app to Apple's TestFlight. We'll keep you posted about public
beta testing, on the way soon.

*Isaac V* `~davtyr-nimren` finished an [in-Urbit static-site generator](https://github.com/urbit/arvo/pull/745) this
week. When merged, this will give you the option to easily host your urbit's static files through a production-ready Unix
web server like Nginx in tandem with Arvo's web server, Eyre. This way, you can still host fast collections while we
continue to work on Arvo's performance.

*Ted* `~rovnys-ricfer` has been at LambdaConf 2018 this week spreading the good news of `~zod` and
non-lambda-calculus-based functional programming. Our good friend and galactic senator Justin LeBlanc `~leb` gave a talk,
_Hoon and You - A Functional Programming Perspective_. Hopefully we can get slides and a video for you soon.

*Elliot* `~littel-ponnys` worked more on new Ford. It's now working as its own separate vane in the kernel, `%turbo`, and
it reloads itself on Arvo `|reset`s and `|reload`s. While old `%ford` still exists, the next steps are to integrate
`%turbo` with the rest of the system. Elliot has been working on a separate Dojo, _Dontjo_, that uses Turbo instead of
old Ford. New Ford work is [here](https://github.com/urbit/arvo/tree/ford-turbo), and Fora updates are
[here](https://fora.urbit.org/proposals/posts/~2018.3.15..04.24.35..a47f~/).

*Mark* `~palfun-foslup` has been wrapping up Urbit-on-ETH constitution work this week. We're just about in our final lap,
finalizing our audit reports, fixing the last of known bugs, upgrading the contracts to latest Solidity and OpenZeppelin
versions, and rounding our our test coverage, code comments and documentation, and ERC721 compliance. The latest contract
code can be found [here](https://github.com/urbit/constitution). We'll come out with an official email blast and
urbit.org post with more information when we're all ready to go.

*Curtis* `~sorreg-namtyv` has been working more on Hoon. Notably, one new change on the table is switching the model-arm
rune from `+=` to `+$`, keeping it more in line with the `$` family of Hoon syntax relating to models. The feedback from
the community in `/urbit-meta` on this was positive. Additionally, he's been rethinking the `+toga` data structure for
dealing with faces (variable names) on Hoon values. His research branch is
[here](https://github.com/cgyarvin/arvo/tree/research-tome). We'll have more to report next week.

*Joe* `~master-morzod` has been continuing work on the HTTPS project. Notably this week, Joe's been working on an
in-Urbit reverse TCP proxy, so that planets behind private networks / NATs can still have their data served to
`ship.urbit.org` via their star over Ames. With this last feature, in addition to Joe's mostly-completed `libh2o`,
LetsEncrypt, and dynamic-DNS Gall-app implementations, the fast and secure direct `ship.urbit.org` feature of MVE should
be primed to get tested into existence, then shipped. Joe's latest work-in-progress is
[here](https://github.com/joemfb/arvo/tree/reverse-proxy-notification).

*Josh* `~taglux-nidsep` and *Robert* `~lodleb-ritrul` blazed through more doc this week. Josh's [new Hoon
tutorials](https://github.com/joshuareagan/doc-drafts) are starting to come together. Rob has been improving the
standard-library docs and has open [several pull requests](https://github.com/urbit/docs/pulls), to be reviewed and
merged this week. The docs are getting better.

If you haven't already, give Josh's Hoon exercises a shot! (aka Hoon Bootcamp) You can find exercise set #1 on Fora
[here](https://fora.urbit.org/answers/posts/~2018.5.24/) and set #2
[here](https://fora.urbit.org/answers/posts/~2018.6.1/).

With Ted out this week and Josh focused on doc work, they're going to push back Mars Talk to next week. So, look out for
next week's update for the time and topic of Season 2, Episode 7.

One last reminder: [_there is no Urbit ICO_](https://urbit.org/updates/2018.5.29-no-ico). Anything else that you've heard
is wrong. Don't get scammed!

We hope you've been enjoying these weekly updates, now [actually weekly](https://urbit.org/blog/weekly-updates/).
`/urbit-meta` has been really active lately. Don't be shy to pop in and meet everybody.

See you around!
